---
layout: post
title: "Templated user/system configurations with mkdot"
---

I am pretty much constantly tweaking my personal system's configuration. Ever since discovering the [r/unixporn](https://www.reddit.com/r/unixporn/) subreddit, I've searched for the "perfect" dotfile management and templating system to no avail, which ultimately led to writing my own. My inspiration ultimately came from a Apache Web Server configuration templating system I wrote for our internal servers at Wolfram Research called [mkconf](https://github.com/HarrisonTotty/mkconf), which was in-turn inspired by the [Jinja-based](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/2.10/) templating system employed by many "DevOps" utilities like Salt and Ansible. So, I ended-up writing [mkdot](https://github.com/HarrisonTotty/mkdot): "The handy dotfile templating system".


# Introduction

`mkdot` is a Python script that generates user/system configuration files ("dotfiles") from Jinja2 templates. Like `mkconf`, I designed it to work equally-well as both an interactive ("on-demand") script and a more hands-off automation-ready script. It features useful colored output, optional file logging, dry-run support, existing dotfile backups, configuration via environment variables, and the ability to quickly revert changes. It requires Python 3, [PyYAML](https://pyyaml.org/), [Jinja2](http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/2.10/), and `rsync`. In the simplest example, it is invoked like so:

```bash
$ mkdot example/example.yaml example/templates
```

where `example/example.yaml` is the "template configuration file" and `example/templates` is a directory containing the templates to be translated.


# Basic Example

Let's look at a super simple example. Let's say we have the following directory structure:

```
example/
  example.yaml
  templates/
    i3/
      config.template
```

where `example/templates/i3/config.template` corresponds to an configuration file template for the _i3 window manager_. `example/example.yaml` might look like the following:

```yaml
# Example Template Configuration File
# -----------------------------------

templates:
  # ----- Window Manager: i3 -----
  - file: "i3/config"
    template: "i3/config.template"
    editor: "emacs"
```

In short, the `templates` key contains a list of dictionaries specifying the files to translate relative to the supplied templates directory. The `file` key specifies the name and path of the "output" file, relative to the supplied output path (`~/.config` by default), while the `template` key specifies the name and path of the "input" file, relative to the supplied templates directory (`example/templates` in this case). All other key-value pairs are variables whose values may be referenced by the template file. To see what I mean, let's look at a chunk of `example/templates/i3/config.template`:

```
# ...

# Set the modifier to the "Windows" key
set $mod Mod4

# Launch the configured text editor
bindsym $mod+e exec {{ this.editor }}

# ...
```

As you can expect, the expression `{{ this.editor }}` will be replaced with `emacs` in the resulting configuration file. `this` is a shorthand automatically added by `mkdot` so that your templates don't have to crawl through the `templates` dictionary themselves.

So one could imagine a situation where, perhaps I want to use `emacs` at home but `vim` at work. I could let both my home and work computers build from the same base templates, but separate template configuration files.


# A More Complex Example

Let's take the conclusion in the previous section a bit further by having only one repository for both our home and work computers, with a setup that looks like this:

```
dotfiles/
  yaml/
    home.yaml
    work.yaml
  templates/
    i3/
      config.template
    herbstluftwm/
      autostart.template
```

We could configure our home computer to use _i3_ as its window manager by specifying in `home.yaml`:

```yaml
# Home Configuration File
# -----------------------

templates:
  # ----- Window Manager: i3 -----
  - file: "i3/config"
    template: "i3/config.template"
    editor: "emacs"
```

... and configure our work computer to use _herbstluftwm_ by specifying in `work.yaml`:

```yaml
# Work Configuration File
# -----------------------

templates:
  # ----- Window Manager: herbstluftwm -----
  - file: "herbstluftwm/autostart"
    template: "herbstluftwm/autostart.template"
    editor: "vim"
```

In the above situation, all we would need to do is run

```bash
$ mkdot dotfiles/yaml/home.yaml dotfiles/templates
```

on our home computer and

```bash
$ mkdot dotfiles/yaml/work.yaml dotfiles/templates
```

on our work computer. However, `mkdot` actually makes things even easier. If the specified template configuration file is actually a _directory_ instead of a YAML file, it will automatically select a file called `mkdot.yaml` within that directory _or a YAML file that most closely matches the hostname of the executing machine_. This means that if the hostnames of our home and work computers contain the substrings "home" and "work", we can actually run the following command from either machine to get the same effect:

```bash
$ mkdot dotfiles/yaml dotfiles/templates
```


# Conclusions

So hopefully I've convinced you that `mkdot` is pretty much the coolest thing on the planet. I recommend interested parties to take a look at [my dotfiles](https://github.com/HarrisonTotty/dotfiles) for how I currently use the script. You should also read the [README](https://github.com/HarrisonTotty/mkdot/blob/master/README.md) and [templating documentation](https://github.com/HarrisonTotty/mkdot/blob/master/TEMPLATING.md) for more information on the sorts of options you have when using the script.
